---
layout: post
title: Intelligence Concepts - The Intelligence Cycle
---

blah blah introduction

## SANS Incident Response Cycle

Getting away from the abstract to something a bit more distinctly DFIR we get to the (in)famous SANS Incident Response Cycle. The basis of SANS 504: Incident Response & Hacker Techniques this process attempts to codify the typical incident process into a few key steps:

- __Preparation:__ Getting ready for incident response, creating documentation, building tools, etc.
- __Identification:__ This is about the first moment where the victim becomes aware an attack has occurred, hopefully by an internal process or alert. Hopefully not thanks to [Brian Krebs](http://krebsonsecurity.com) or the FBI.  
- __Containment:__ After an incident is identified containment is the processes of keeping further damage from occurring. This could involve deploying patches, blocking C2 access, or pulling a systems power cord out of the wall.
- __Eradication:__ In a malware centric response this is about remediating compromised hosts, removing implants, etc.
- __Recovery:__ Assuming systems were taken offline recovery is the process of restoring all business functions, such as bringing a compromised server back online.
- __Lessons Learned:__ The most commonly forgotten aspect lessons learned is about asking the question "How can we do better next time?" and avoiding the same mistakes twice.

### A Walk Through the Intelligence Cycle

### Takeaways from SANS Incident Response Cycle

This process is a solid, basic understanding of the incident process that makes it easy to frame the actions of an incident. As responders get more advanced this process starts showing flaws since an incident response can't be so rigid. Many organizations never have a "preparation" stage, always being under attack and never able to call a "time out" to get their house in order. Additionally stages like containment, eradication, and recovery often run concurrently. Additionally the process is very malware centric, and becomes difficult to apply to other forms of incidents.

The other issue with the traditional SANS IR process is it was developed before the "beginning" of intelligence driven incident response. It has no integration with external intelligence sources or dissemination. It's useful in the short term, but we can do better.

## More Reading
